# Library Management System

## Author
Franz Rehschuh (Matr.-Nr.:MATRICULATION_NUMBER) (s-Nr.:s88216)

## Disclosure
For UI parts of this project, especially the parts which needed deep understanding of the Qt framework, its different classes and methods, I used the help of AI tools and ressources.
Examples where I used AI tools:
- creating the /ui/material.qss file to create a similar UI style like Android Material You
- double check my design/architectural decisions I made for the InfoPanel, CustomFilterProxModel or in the Mainw class

On the other hand I didnt used Qt Creator to create the UI elements or to make any connections between UI elements.
I took a bit of use of Qt Designer to create dummy Layouts, to get a feeling how I can design the UI.

Furthermore I want to make clear, that I did not use any AI tools for the core implementations of the underlying data model of the project. This includes files in the /core and /manager directories and table model files in the /tablemodel directory.

## Abstract
This project is a library management system written in C++ with the Qt framework for the GUI. It allows users to manage a collection of different media types in text, audio and video format. Additionally persons can be managed, which can be borrower and/or artists of a library item. In the end transactions can be created, which links a library item to a person. The program supports basic operations like adding, deleting, searching and sorting items, persons and transactions.

Some architectural decisions which are used troughout the project:
- Different entities reference each other by their unique ID (unsigned long), to avoid redundant data, see relationships and allow easy changes. Although a DBMS would be more suitable for this task, I decided to use a custom data management, to use standard files and allow easy access to the data, without installing a DBMS.
- The data is stored in newline separated json files, which allows flexible and easy work with the data.
- During implementation of the saver/loader methods, I saw how powerful the use of Json is. Because the methods for loading/saving of the core entites already used Json format, I decided to reuse these methods when gathering class parameters for the UI elements. For example the InfoPanel class havily utilizes the Json format to create a clean, structured input form.
- To give some parameters specific attributes and restrictions, I use Schema Jsons. This allows to make the form inputs more user friendly and type safe. For example the integer field uses a SpinBox to restrict the input to numbers. Furthermore fields can be marked as required, optional or readonly. 
 
## Project Architecture
The project is roughly structured into several directories:
- **/**: Contains the test.cpp file, Beleg.pro, ressources.qrc and this README.md file.
- **/build**: Contains the build files, which are generated by make and qmake.
  - **/build/moc**: Contains the moc files, which are generated by the Qt Meta Object Compiler.
  - **/build/obj**: Contains the object files, which are generated by the compiler.
  - **/build/rcc**: Contains the resource files, which are generated by the Qt Resource Compiler.
- **/core**: Contains the core data model classes, which represent the library items, media items, persons and transactions.
- **/manager**: Contains the classes responsible for managing multiple instances of the library items, media, persons and transactions.
- **/tablemodel**: Contains classes that implement the Qt model-view architecture, allowing the data to be displayed in a table format. Provides further methods for interaction with the info/add panel.
- **/ui**: Contains the classes responsible for the user interface, including the main window, toolbar, dialogs and infopanel. Also includes the material.qss file.
- **/icons**: Contains the icons used in the user interface.
- **/utils**: Contains utility functions, such for creating a default json from the schema or for the custom return type.
- **/data**: Contains the data files used by the application.

## Compiling Instructions
- During development 6.9.0 was used. At the end the project was backported to Qt 5
- To compile the project, you need to have Qt installed on your system.
- navigate to the project directory and run the following commands:
```bash
qmake Beleg.pro
make
```

- If you have any issues with the compilation, try to clean up the build directory and try again.
```bash
find build -type f -delete
```


## Usage Instructions
### Adding Data
Before any media can be borrowed, persons and media/library items need to be added, which can interact with each other.

### Adding Persons
1. Click on the "Persons" button in the tab selection bar.
2. Click on the Plus button in the right upper corner of the Window.
3. Fill the form. When you see input fields with a red border, this means that these fields are required and need to be filled. Furthermore you have the option to declare a person as an artist, borrower or both, by checking the corresponding checkboxes.
4. As soon as all required fields are filled, click on the "Save" button.
5. When you want to cancel the input, click on the "Cancel" button with the cross icon.
6. The new person should now be visible in the table

### Adding Library Items
- Mostly same procedure as adding persons
- Library items refer to a media item. While the media item holds the information about the media itself, the library item is the physical representation of the media in the library. It holds information about the location, availability and other attributes.
- When you want to create a library item with a new media item, you have to select a unused media id. By default, the next free media id is selected, which is the highest id + 1 of all media items in the system.
- When you choose a media item, which is already in the system, the form will prefill the fields of the media item, so you can easily create a new library item (new physical representation) for it.
- You have the option between different media types. Find the "Media Type" field in the Form and select the desired type from the dropdown menu. Depending on the media type, different fields are available to fill.

After you added at least one borrower and one library item, you can create transactions, which link the two entities together.
### Adding Transactions
1. Click on the "Transactions" button in the tab selection bar.
2. Click on the Plus button in the right upper corner of the Window.
3. When you know the ids you can enter them directly. Otherwise you can also enter the name of the borrower or library item and the system will automatically make suggestions you can choose from.
4. Fill the form.
5. Click on the "Save" button.

### Deleting Data
Note: When you delete data which is referenced by another entity, the data wont be visible in the entity any more.
For example:
- Delete person which is part of a transaction.
- The person wont be visible in the transaction any more. Instead it will contain some blank fields.

Media Items get automatically removed with the last libitem which would reference it.

1. Go to the corresponding tab
2. Select the row(s) you want to delete
3. Click on the "Delete" button in the right upper corner of the Window, next to the add button
4. Confirm the deletion in the dialog that appears.

### Searching Data
- case insensitive
- searches trough all columns of the table
- every search token (input delimited by space) has to match at least one column, so that the row is a match

1. Go to the corresponding tab
2. Click into the search bar at the top left of the window
3. Type in the search term you want to search for
4. The table will be filtered accordingly.

### Sorting Data
- Click on the column header of the column you want to sort by
- Click again to reverse the sort order
OR
- Go into the second dropdown menu in the toolbar and select the column you want to sort by

### Show specific columns
- click on the first dropdown menu in the toolbar
- select the columns you want to show or hide

### Viewing Details & Editing Data
- double click on a row in the table you want to view
- a widget will open at the right side of the window
- you can edit the data by clicking on the "Edit" button with the pen in the widget
- revert the changes by clicking on the "Cancel" button with the cross icon
- save the changes by clicking on the "Save" button with the disk icon
- some fields are readonly like an id for example
- you can also drag the dock widget out of the window

